docs(java): Add Kafka queue tracing docs (#17503)
getsentry/sentry-docs: docs/platforms/java/common/integrations/kafka.mdx

---
title: Kafka Integration
description: "Learn how to trace Kafka queue operations with Sentry."
---

> Sentry's Kafka integration lets you trace Kafka producer sends and consumer record processing. In Spring Boot, this works automatically. With raw `kafka-clients`, you instrument producers and consumers with `sentry-kafka`. Queue spans appear in Sentry's [Queues dashboard](https://sentry.io/orgredirect/organizations/:orgslug/insights/backend/queues/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sentry's Kafka integration lets you trace both production and consumption. In Spring Boot, this happens automatically. If you're using raw `kafka-clients`, you'll need to instrument producers and consumers with `sentry-kafka`. 

Once configured, queue spans will appear in Sentry's [Queues dashboard](https://sentry.io/orgredirect/organizations/:orgslug/insights/backend/queues/).
```

    public void onOrder(ConsumerRecord<String, String> record) {
        // Sentry automatically records a queue.process transaction for this method.
        processOrder(record.value());
    }
}
```

```kotlin {tabTitle:Kotlin}
import org.apache.kafka.clients.consumer.ConsumerRecord
import org.springframework.kafka.annotation.KafkaListener
import org.springframework.stereotype.Component

@Component
class OrderConsumer {

    @KafkaListener(topics = "orders", groupId = "order-group")
    fun onOrder(record: ConsumerRecord<String, String>) {
        // Sentry automatically records a queue.process transaction for this method.
        processOrder(record.value())
    }
}
```

### Enable Retry Count

Sentry sets `messaging.message.retry.count` from Spring Kafka's
`kafka_deliveryAttempt` header. Spring Kafka only adds this header when delivery
attempt headers are enabled and the listener uses an error handler or after-rollback
processor that supports delivery attempts.

The following example uses Spring Kafka's `DefaultErrorHandler`. If your app already
uses retry handling that supports delivery attempts, keep your existing handler and
enable the header on the listener container:

> ```java {tabTitle:Java}

Reviewer 2: Do we want a `Kotlin` sample here too?

    return new DefaultErrorHandler(new FixedBackOff(0L, 1L));
}

@Bean
ContainerCustomizer<Object, Object, ConcurrentMessageListenerContainer<Object, Object>>
    kafkaContainerCustomizer() {
    return container -> container.getContainerProperties().setDeliveryAttemptHeader(true);
}
```

Without that header, Sentry does not set `messaging.message.retry.count`.

</PlatformSection>

<PlatformSection notSupported={["java.spring-boot"]}>

For applications using `kafka-clients` directly (without Spring), use the `sentry-kafka` module. If you're using Kafka through Spring Boot, use the [Spring Boot Kafka docs](/platforms/java/guides/spring-boot/integrations/kafka/) instead.

### Install

```groovy {tabTitle:Gradle}
implementation 'io.sentry:sentry-kafka:{{@inject packages.version('sentry.java.kafka', '8.37.0') }}'
```

```xml {tabTitle:Maven}
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.sentry</groupId>
    <artifactId>sentry-kafka</artifactId>
    <version>{{@inject packages.version('sentry.java.kafka', '8.37.0') }}</version>
</dependency>
```

```scala {tabTitle:SBT}
libraryDependencies += "io.sentry" % "sentry-kafka" % "{{@inject packages.version('sentry.java.kafka', '8.37.0') }}"
```

> For other dependency managers, check out the [central Maven repository](https://search.maven.org/artifact/io.sentry/sentry-kafka).

Reviewer: @adinauer This links is 404ing for me, does it require authentication?

Author: We haven't released it yet, it'll be there once we include `sentry-kafka` in a release of Java SDK.
